docs: add initial Kotlin docs (#16304)
pantsbuild/pants: docs/markdown/Java and Scala/kotlin.md

---
title: "Kotlin"
slug: "kotlin"
excerpt: "Kotlin support for Pants."
hidden: false

> ---

Reviewer: I created this page for you in the Readme editor for 2.13 and 2.14

I think you also want to add this:

```
createdAt: "2022-07-26T02:02:59.962Z"
updatedAt: "2022-07-26T02:02:59.962Z"
```

> 

Reviewer 2: This page is very, very similar to the existing page, which is a good sign!

But... rather than duplicating it, it would probably be good to extract the shared portion into a JVM overview page, and then have small pages for Kotlin, Scala, Java that highlight only the differences?

Author: While I would support such a refactor of the docs, I don't really have the time to devote to such a docs refactor. So I'll start with a Kotlin page in this PR so at least we have a place to link to in a Kotlin blog post with the 2.13 release.

Author: (Also, a follow-up to this PR will add docs on `kotlinc` plugins.)

Reviewer: I continue to lean towards the best approach being something like Sphinx that lets us reuse the same docs snippet in multiple places. 

Duplication can be a good thing in docs -- users don't have to see things that aren't relevant to them, and we make our advice more localized. But it's a maintenance burden, so -> Sphinx

Author: These docs are markdown though, right? Where are Sphinx docs in the repo?

Reviewer 3: We are not using sphinx yet, but it is planned as future work

Reviewer 3: Generally speaking, I'd prefer the docs to be repetitive, so that you can scan through one page to get an idea of how things work.  The high granularity of e.g. our onboarding docs was noted as a barrier to entry at PyCon sprints.

> 📘 Example Kotlin repository
>
> Check out [github.com/pantsbuild/example-kotlin](https://github.com/pantsbuild/example-kotlin) to try a
> sample Pants project with Kotlin support.

# Overview

[Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/) is a programming language from Jetbrains that runs on the JVM and certain other
platforms. The Kotlin backend in Pants supports compilation, testing, and linting of
[Kotlin code for the JVM](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/server-overview.html). (The other Kotlin platforms including
[Kotlin Multiplatform Mobile](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/multiplatform.html) and
[Kotlin/JS](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/js-overview.html) are not currently supported, nor are there currently
any plans to do so.)

# Initial Setup

First, activate the Kotlin backend in `pants.toml` plus the `ktlint` backend if you would like to use
[`ktlint`](https://ktlint.github.io/) for code formatting and linting:

```toml pants.toml
[GLOBAL]
backend_packages = [
  "pants.backend.experimental.kotlin",
  
  # Activate the following backend if you want to use `ktlint` for code formatting and linting.
  "pants.backend.experimental.kotlin.lint.ktlint",
]
```

## Choosing JDK and Kotlin versions

> Pants supports choosing the JDK and Kotlin versions per target in your repository, but to reduce the amount of

Reviewer: Nit to make it simpler to read

```suggestion
Pants supports choosing the JDK and Kotlin versions per target in your repository. However, to reduce the amount of
```

Author: Made edit but moved "however" after the "to" clause.

boilerplate required, most users set repository-wide defaults in `pants.toml`, and then only override them when
necessary for particular targets.

### JDK

JDKs used by Pants are automatically fetched using [Coursier](https://get-coursier.io/), and are chosen using

> the [`[jvm].jdk` setting](doc:reference-jvm#section-jdk) to set a repository-wide default.

Reviewer: Nit, we usually call them "options"

```suggestion
the [`[jvm].jdk` option](doc:reference-jvm#section-jdk) to set a repository-wide default.
```

Author: This was copied verbatim from `jvm-overview.md`. Maybe audit the docs for this usage?

To override the default on a particular target, you can use the [`jdk=` field](doc:reference-kotlin_source#codejdkcode).
It can be useful to use the [`parametrize` builtin](doc:targets#parametrizing-targets) with the `jdk=` field,
particularly to run test targets under multiple JDKs.

### Kotlin version

The Kotlin version to use is configured on a resolve-by-resolve basis (see the "Third-party dependencies" section
below) using the [`[kotlin].version_for_resolve` option](doc:reference-kotlin#section-version_for_resolve). The
default Kotlin version for your repository will thus be whichever Kotlin version is configured for the "default"
resolve, which is configured by the [`[jvm].default_resolve` option](reference-jvm#section-default-resolve).

Each resolve must contain the following jars for the Kotlin runtime with the version matching the version specified
for the resolve in the `[kotlin].version_for_resolve` option:

> - org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-stdlib
> - org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-reflect
> - org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-script-runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-stdlib`
- `org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-reflect`
- `org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-script-runtime`
```

To use multiple Kotlin versions in a repository, you would define multiple resolves, and then adjust
the [`resolve` field](doc:reference-kotlin_junit_test#coderesolvecode) of any targets which should be used with the
non-`default_resolve` resolve.

To cross-build a set of Kotlin targets for multiple Kotlin versions, you can use the
[`parametrize` builtin](doc:targets#parametrizing-targets) with the `resolve=` field of the target and its dependencies.

> > 🚧 `jvm_artifact` targets for the Kotlin runtime are explicitly required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 🚧 `jvm_artifact` targets for the Kotlin runtime must be explicitly defined
```

   load the resource).

For example:

```toml pants.toml
[source]
# In order for the resource to be loadable as `org/pantsbuild/example/lib/hello.txt`,
# the `/src/jvm/ prefix needs to be stripped.
root_patterns = ["/src/*"]
```
```python src/jvm/org/pantsbuild/example/lib/BUILD
kotlin_sources(dependencies=[":hello"])

resources(name="hello", sources=["hello.txt"])
```
```java src/jvm/org/pantsbuild/example/lib/Loader.java
package org.pantsbuild.example.lib

import com.google.common.io.Resources

fun load() {
  ... = Resources.getResource(Loader.class, "hello.txt")
}
```
```text src/jvm/org/pantsbuild/example/lib/hello.txt
Hello world!
```

# Tasks

## Compile code

To manually check that sources compile, use `./pants check`:

```
# Check a single file
❯ ./pants check src/jvm/org/pantsbuild/example/lib/ExampleLib.kt

# Check files located recursively under a directory
❯ ./pants check src/jvm::

# Check the whole repository
❯ ./pants check ::
```

## Run tests

To run tests, use `./pants test`:

```
# Run a single test file
❯ ./pants test tests/jvm/org/pantsbuild/example/lib/ExampleLibTest.kt

# Test all files in a directory

> ❯ ./pants test tests/jvm::

Reviewer: That would result in testing all subdirs too

```suggestion
❯ ./pants test tests/jvm
```

Author: I believe that is the intent. I'll update the comment.
